---
title: the try-works and the greeks
draft: true
---

## sources:
http://www.powermobydick.com/Moby096.html
http://www.powermobydick.com/Moby119.html
Agape, Agape - William Gaddis


## cauldron

>To-morrow, in the natural sun, the skies will be bright; those who glared like devils in the forking flames, the morn will show in far other, at least gentler, relief; the glorious, golden, glad sun, the only true lamp—all others but liars! 
>
>Nevertheless the sun hides not Virginia's Dismal Swamp, nor Rome's accursed Campagna, nor wide Sahara, nor all the millions of miles of deserts and of griefs beneath the moon. The sun hides not the ocean, which is the dark side of this earth, and which is two thirds of this earth. So, therefore, that mortal man who hath more of joy than sorrow in him, that mortal man cannot be true—not true, or undeveloped. With books the same. The truest of all men was the Man of Sorrows, and the truest of all books is Solomon's, and Ecclesiastes is the fine hammered steel of woe. "All is vanity". ALL. This wilful world hath not got hold of unchristian Solomon's wisdom yet. But he who dodges hospitals and jails, and walks fast crossing grave-yards, and would rather talk of operas than hell; calls Cowper, Young, Pascal, Rousseau, poor devils all of sick men; and throughout a care-free lifetime swears by Rabelais as passing wise, and therefore jolly;—not that man is fitted to sit down on tomb-stones, and break the green damp mould with unfathomably wondrous Solomon.
>
>But even Solomon, he says, "the man that wandereth out of the way of understanding shall remain" (i. e. even while living) "in the congregation of the dead". Give not thyself up, then, to fire, lest it invert thee, deaden thee; as for the time it did me.

*Moby Dick*, Ch. 96. *The Try-Works*

the Try-Works, where oil is recovered from blubber of whales. Ishmael warns against staring into the fire of these Try-Works, the fire of transforming raw material into refined product, in this case oil which can be used to power machinery, bring light to cities, run cars, etc. This is enchantment with the idea of realizing the true potential within raw material, an alchemical trope seen in the allegory of distillation, in liquor being called *spirits* and in whisky being derived from the Gaelic *Uisce beatha* or "water of life". 

in Ch. 119, *The Candles*, we see the fire return, this time in the midst of a storm. A typhoon hits the Pequod as it sails the waters near Japan, opening with a foreboding passage about the "Warmest climes but \[nursing] the cruellest fangs...". The typhoon wrought St. Elmo's Fire, threatening to burn down the ship and spurring the crew into action. Crucially, Ahab takes this moment of fear among the crew as an opportunity to preach that "the white flame but lights the way to the White Whale!", the madness foretold by Ishmael in the Try-Works. 

This putrefying flame transfixes Ahab, even when it threatens his own life and those of his crew, serving only to strengthen his obsession with confronting the White Whale; no bad omen but a guiding light that leads toward his ultimate prize. Ahab is a man for which no obstacle can be true sorrow: his entire interface with the world has been reconfigured by the White Whale such that any pain, any suffering is a reification of his desire for the whale. 

What exactly is Ishmael saying when he warns against looking into the fire? Is it simply an admonishment of idolatry, of keeping your eyes fixed on lights other than the supreme lest you have your soul reconfigured by a lesser being? Consider Ishmael's invocation of Solomon's during his polemic against staring into the fire. Solomon was the pinnacle of wisdom in the Hebrew Bible, the king who asked the Lord not for riches, immortality, nor vengeance, but for a discerning heart to judge his people and to distinguish between good and bad. Discontinuities between pre and post Christian Abrahamic religion are illuminated by comparing Solomon to Christ. 

Christianity is a religion not founded on the Hebrew tradition alone: the early church, even the evangelists who wrote the Gospels, were largely Greek or influenced by Greek culture in their time. It's from this Greek influence that we get certain unique and novel aspects of Christianity: the ritual consumption of the body of Christ coming from the tradition of Greek mystery cults like those at Eleusis, or the identification of Christ with the Word (Logos) in the Gospel of John. The Greek influence on Christianity is further realized by considering the gnostic traditions that were contemporary to the early church. These gnostic traditions, drawing on the ideas of Plato and his disciples, eschewed absolutely the earthly matter of this world, taking the story of Christ as an invitation to or rehearsal of their own enlightening and assumption into their divine forms as they grinded away all base and material aspects of themselves. The unique aspect of Christ was that he was God incarnate, he was a man who lead a perfect life, one that was topped off by his Passion -- a painful process of putrefaction by which he ascended to his heavenly throne. In essence, Christianity brought to the Abrahamic tradition a radical and new perspective on the good life, that it was to be marked by suffering in pursuit of an ideal. The early church was marked by various martyrs venerated for their eschewing of earthly suffering and their steadfast belief in the pay-off this would receive in heaven, acting in imitation of Christ suffering through the passion. From this we have the strict and moralizing aspects of Christianity that survive to this day: that salvation hinges upon belief, that trespassing of moral code is met by divine punishment. Note that the latter aspect is only possible by the objectification of an "out-there" form of morality, one that has the agency to punish those who trespass against it. Of course, this is not the entirety of the Christian tradition, and there is much to be said about the love and mercy embodied by the Trinity, and Christ ushering in a new and final covenant with God which provides a direct pathway to forgiveness and cleansing rather than the series of broken promises and shifting goal posts seen in the salvation history of the Old Testament. However, the aforementioned radicalization of morality as having agency and reign over our world is a crucial aspect of Christianity, one that is embodied in certain fiery, apocalyptic, and sometimes vitriolic sects of the religion today, *especially in America*.

In contrast to this, Solomon was a king who led a life that was not in perfect accord with the divine moral code. He had multiple wives, enjoyed sex for pleasure, and forced his people into unpaid labor. It's because of this contrast to traditional Christian conceptions of righteousness and morality that he is often a symbol of esoteric pre-salvation wisdom. There is much folklore about Solomon: that he made deals with demons, that he practiced magic, that he wrote compendiums of sigils and rites of sorcery. He embodies total comprehension of the world order in the Old Testament, prior to the promise of salvation through Christ. In Solomon we have a figure who did not ask the Lord for enlightenment, he instead asked for the more practical and dependable ability to be the best king he could for his people. For Solomon there was no suffering to be sublimed into the divine Good, nor any sacrifice made for esoteric wisdom (at least not in the Hebrew Bible, though post-Christian and gnostic folklore often tries to pin this on him). 

As Ismael said, "The truest of all men was the Man of Sorrows, and the truest of all books is Solomon's, and Ecclesiastes is the fine hammered steel of woe". The point being that the perversion of suffering and sacrifice as a means of achieving divinity is not true wisdom. That true sorrow is necessary for this gift. That transfixion by the flames of putrefaction is more akin to lunacy than righteousness, that these earthly flames of suffering, much like the moon in its Pale Fire, are mere reflections of the true light of the Sun, of the Lord. 

The most terrifying of villains are in the tradition of Ahab: Judge Holden in Blood Meridian, Frank Booth in Blue Velvet, or Alex DeLarge in Clockwork Orange. They are never bored, never depressed, never paralyzed by doubt, and incapable of sorrow. They embody the perversion of suffering into divine righteousness, they are unholy run-off from the marriage of Greek and Hebrew culture, and they are lunatics. 

Heard a Rabbi say that he'd had enough of hearing about people trying to find themselves, that the truth of the matter is that yourself is something you invent by your tongue, breath, and lips. There was another who advised to keep things private until they're permanent, to not go out telling everyone about your destiny, your art, your true self, or your potential before its become permanent. I think I see this wisdom in some of my favorite artists, those who remind me that their profession is closer to that of a magician than a sorcerer, being able to trick people and create illusions.